README.md, before:

# VoxPDF

**Cross-platform PDF text extraction library optimized for text-to-speech**

[![Rust](https://img.shields.io/badge/Rust-1.70+-orange.svg)](https://www.rust-lang.org)
[![Platform](https://img.shields.io/badge/Platform-iOS%20%7C%20Android%20%7C%20Web-blue.svg)](https://github.com/yourusername/voxpdf)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-green.svg)](LICENSE)

---

## Mission

Text-to-speech changed my life. I can learn 100x faster by listening to books constantly while commuting, exercising, and doing chores. But PDF support in TTS apps is either non-existent or locked behind expensive commercial SDKs costing thousands of dollars.

**VoxPDF exists to make PDF-to-speech accessible to everyone.**

This is an open-source, cross-platform library that extracts text from PDFs with intelligent layout understanding, optimized specifically for text-to-speech applications. Built with a **Rust core** and platform-specific bindings (Swift, Kotlin, WASM), following the proven architecture of commercial SDKs like Foxit and PSPDFKit. Built incrementally over months/years, tested rigorously against real-world PDFs, and free forever.

## Why VoxPDF?

### The Problem

- **Commercial SDKs are expensive**: Foxit and PSPDFKit cost $3,000+ per year
- **Existing libraries are inadequate**:
  - PDFKit alone doesn't handle complex layouts (multi-column, headers/footers, reading order)
  - MuPDF is C-based and complex to integrate
  - No library focuses specifically on TTS needs
- **PDF conversion tools are imperfect**: Converting PDFs to EPUB loses structure and requires external tools

### The Solution

VoxPDF provides:

- ✅ **Intelligent text extraction** - Proper reading order, even in complex layouts
- ✅ **TTS optimization** - Clean text flow, hyphenation handling, structure preservation
- ✅ **Word-level tracking** - Precise positions for synchronized highlighting
- ✅ **Chapter detection** - Automatic TOC generation and navigation
- ✅ **Free and open source** - MIT licensed, community-driven
- ✅ **Cross-platform architecture** - Rust core + C FFI + platform bindings (Swift, Kotlin, WASM)
- ✅ **Commercial-grade design** - Same architecture as Foxit SDK and PSPDFKit
- ✅ **Performance** - Native Rust/C-level speed without sacrificing memory safety
- ✅ **Platform-native APIs** - Idiomatic Swift/Kotlin bindings with modern concurrency support

## Current Status

**🚧 In Active Development**

- **Current Phase**: Phase 0 (Foundation) - COMPLETE
  - ✅ Project structure initialized
  - ✅ Architecture documented (Rust core + FFI + bindings)
  - ✅ Development roadmap established

- **Next Step**: Slice 0 - lopdf validation spike (2-3 days)
  - Validate word position extraction capabilities
  - Decision point: Continue with lopdf or pivot to mupdf-sys

- **Target v0.1.0**: Basic text extraction better than PDFKit alone (4-6 weeks)
- **Target v1.0.0**: Production-ready for technical books and papers (9-12 months)

See [ROADMAP.md](docs/ROADMAP.md) for detailed milestones.

## Quick Start

**Note:** VoxPDF is still in early development. The API shown below represents the planned Swift bindings interface (wrapping the Rust core).

### iOS/macOS (Swift)

```swift
import VoxPDF

// Load a PDF
let url = URL(fileURLWithPath: "book.pdf")
let document = try PDFDocument(url: url)

// Extract text optimized for TTS
let content = try await document.extract()

// Get chapters for navigation
for chapter in content.chapters {
    print("\(chapter.title) - Page \(chapter.pageNumber)")
}

// Get text to read aloud
for paragraph in content.paragraphs {
    // Feed to AVSpeechSynthesizer or your TTS engine
    speak(paragraph.text)
}

// Track word positions for highlighting
for word in paragraph.words {
    highlightRect(word.bounds, on: word.pageNumber)
}
```

### Android (Kotlin) - Coming Soon

```kotlin
// Kotlin bindings will provide similar idiomatic API
val document = PDFDocument(file)
val content = document.extract()
```

### Web (JavaScript) - Coming Soon

```javascript
// WASM bindings will provide JavaScript API
const document = await VoxPDF.open("book.pdf");
const content = await document.extract();
```

## Architecture

```
┌─────────────────────────────────────┐
│   Platform Bindings (Swift, etc.)  │  ← Idiomatic APIs
│   - PDFDocument wrapper             │    Memory management
│   - Native error types              │    async/await
├─────────────────────────────────────┤
│         C FFI Boundary              │  ← Stable interface
│   - Opaque pointers                 │    Cross-platform
│   - C structs                       │    Clear ownership
├─────────────────────────────────────┤
│      Rust Core (voxpdf-core)        │  ← All business logic
│   - PDF parsing (lopdf/mupdf)       │    Memory safe
│   - Text extraction                 │    Performance
│   - Layout analysis                 │    Portable
└─────────────────────────────────────┘
```

## Features

### ✅ Phase 0: Foundation (COMPLETE)
- Project structure
- Rust workspace setup
- Documentation (ARCHITECTURE.md, ROADMAP.md)
- Development plan

### 🚧 Next: Slice 0 (Validation Spike)
- Validate lopdf word position extraction
- Decision: Continue with lopdf or pivot to mupdf-sys

### 🎯 v0.1.0 (4-6 weeks) - Better than PDFKit
- Basic text extraction from PDFs
- Word position tracking (for highlighting)
- Paragraph detection
- Hyphenation reassembly
- TOC extraction from PDF metadata
- Swift bindings + Swift Package Manager distribution

### 🎯 v0.5.0 (3-4 months) - Technical Books
- Multi-column layout detection
- Header/footer removal
- Intelligent reading order
- Chapter detection via font analysis

### 🌟 v1.0.0 (9-12 months) - Production Ready
- Complex layouts (3-column, mixed)
- Footnote handling
- Table detection
- Android (Kotlin) bindings
- Comprehensive test suite (100+ PDFs)

See [ROADMAP.md](docs/ROADMAP.md) for complete feature timeline.

## Philosophy

### Incremental Progress
We ship value early and improve over months/years. Each release solves real problems, even if not perfect.

### Tested Against Reality
Every feature is tested against real PDFs: technical books, academic papers, novels, magazines. We accept PDF test cases from the community.

### Focused Scope
VoxPDF optimizes for **reading**, not editing or rendering. We solve the 80% case extremely well rather than trying to handle every PDF edge case.

### Community-Driven
The roadmap evolves based on GitHub issues, user-submitted problematic PDFs, and community pull requests.

## Installation

**Coming Soon** - VoxPDF will be available once v0.1.0 is released.

### Rust (Core Library)

```toml
[dependencies]
voxpdf-core = "0.1"
```

### iOS/macOS (Swift Package Manager)

```swift
dependencies: [
    .package(url: "https://github.com/yourusername/voxpdf-swift.git", from: "0.1.0")
]
```

### Android (Gradle)

```gradle
// Coming in v1.0
implementation 'com.voxpdf:voxpdf-kotlin:0.1.0'
```

### Web (npm)

```bash
# Coming in v1.0+
npm install voxpdf-wasm
```

## Documentation

- [Roadmap](docs/ROADMAP.md) - Phased development plan
- [Architecture](docs/ARCHITECTURE.md) - Technical design decisions
- [Contributing](docs/CONTRIBUTING.md) - How to help build VoxPDF
- [API Reference](docs/API.md) - Detailed API documentation (coming soon)

## Use Cases

VoxPDF is perfect for:

- 📱 **TTS apps** - Audiobook players, accessibility tools, reading assistants
- 📚 **Educational tools** - Study apps, language learning, academic research
- ♿ **Accessibility** - Screen readers, dyslexia aids, visual impairment support
- 🎧 **Personal projects** - DIY audiobook creation, podcast generation

## Contributing

We welcome contributions! See [CONTRIBUTING.md](docs/CONTRIBUTING.md) for:

- How to set up the development environment
- Good first issues for newcomers
- Code style guidelines
- How to submit test PDFs

**Help Wanted:**
- 🐛 Bug reports with problematic PDFs
- ✨ Feature requests based on real use cases
- 📝 Documentation improvements
- 🧪 Test PDFs from different generators (LaTeX, InDesign, Word, etc.)

## Real-World Testing

VoxPDF is battle-tested as the PDF engine for [Listen2](https://github.com/yourusername/Listen2), a TTS audiobook player for iOS. Every improvement to VoxPDF immediately benefits Listen2 users.

## License

MIT License - see [LICENSE](LICENSE) for details.

Free to use in commercial and open-source projects.

## Acknowledgments

Built with:
- **Rust** - Memory-safe systems language enabling cross-platform performance
- **lopdf** - Pure Rust PDF parsing library (starting point)
- **MuPDF** - Industry-standard PDF library (fallback option)
- **Claude Code** - AI pair programming for incremental development
- **Community** - Test PDFs, bug reports, and feature requests from users worldwide

Inspired by:
- **Foxit SDK** - Commercial PDF SDK (C++ core) that proved the compiled core + FFI + bindings architecture
- **PSPDFKit** - Commercial SDK (C++ core) demonstrating cross-platform PDF excellence
- **Voice Dream Reader** - iOS app that showed the importance of precise word highlighting
- **MuPDF** - Open-source PDF library (C core) demonstrating what's achievable
- **Listen2** - Our TTS app that sparked the need for VoxPDF

We follow the same proven pattern as commercial SDKs, but use Rust instead of C++ for memory safety.

## Support

- 🐛 [Report a bug](https://github.com/yourusername/VoxPDF/issues/new?template=bug_report.md)
- 💡 [Request a feature](https://github.com/yourusername/VoxPDF/issues/new?template=feature_request.md)
- 📖 [Submit a problematic PDF](https://github.com/yourusername/VoxPDF/issues/new?template=pdf_test_case.md)
- 💬 [Discussions](https://github.com/yourusername/VoxPDF/discussions)

---

**Status**: 🚧 Phase 0 Complete - Foundation laid, validation spike next
**Architecture**: Rust core + C FFI + platform bindings (Swift, Kotlin, WASM)
**Maintainer**: [@zachswift](https://github.com/zachswift)
**Started**: November 2025
**Next Milestone**: Slice 0 validation spike (2-3 days)
**First Release Target**: February 2026 (v0.1.0)

**Star ⭐ this repo if you believe TTS should be accessible to everyone!**

Commit message:

Revise mission statement for clarity and detail
Updated personal experience to reflect learning over 10 years.

README.md, after:

# VoxPDF

**Cross-platform PDF text extraction library optimized for text-to-speech**

[![Rust](https://img.shields.io/badge/Rust-1.70+-orange.svg)](https://www.rust-lang.org)
[![Platform](https://img.shields.io/badge/Platform-iOS%20%7C%20Android%20%7C%20Web-blue.svg)](https://github.com/yourusername/voxpdf)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-green.svg)](LICENSE)

---

## Mission

Text-to-speech changed my life. I've learned so much in the past 10 years by listening to books constantly while commuting, exercising, and doing chores. But PDF support in TTS apps is either non-existent or locked behind expensive commercial SDKs costing thousands of dollars.

**VoxPDF exists to make PDF-to-speech accessible to everyone.**

This is an open-source, cross-platform library that extracts text from PDFs with intelligent layout understanding, optimized specifically for text-to-speech applications. Built with a **Rust core** and platform-specific bindings (Swift, Kotlin, WASM), following the proven architecture of commercial SDKs like Foxit and PSPDFKit. Built incrementally over months/years, tested rigorously against real-world PDFs, and free forever.

## Why VoxPDF?

### The Problem

- **Commercial SDKs are expensive**: Foxit and PSPDFKit cost $3,000+ per year
- **Existing libraries are inadequate**:
  - PDFKit alone doesn't handle complex layouts (multi-column, headers/footers, reading order)
  - MuPDF is C-based and complex to integrate
  - No library focuses specifically on TTS needs
- **PDF conversion tools are imperfect**: Converting PDFs to EPUB loses structure and requires external tools

### The Solution

VoxPDF provides:

- ✅ **Intelligent text extraction** - Proper reading order, even in complex layouts
- ✅ **TTS optimization** - Clean text flow, hyphenation handling, structure preservation
- ✅ **Word-level tracking** - Precise positions for synchronized highlighting
- ✅ **Chapter detection** - Automatic TOC generation and navigation
- ✅ **Free and open source** - MIT licensed, community-driven
- ✅ **Cross-platform architecture** - Rust core + C FFI + platform bindings (Swift, Kotlin, WASM)
- ✅ **Commercial-grade design** - Same architecture as Foxit SDK and PSPDFKit
- ✅ **Performance** - Native Rust/C-level speed without sacrificing memory safety
- ✅ **Platform-native APIs** - Idiomatic Swift/Kotlin bindings with modern concurrency support

## Current Status

**🚧 In Active Development**

- **Current Phase**: Phase 0 (Foundation) - COMPLETE
  - ✅ Project structure initialized
  - ✅ Architecture documented (Rust core + FFI + bindings)
  - ✅ Development roadmap established

- **Next Step**: Slice 0 - lopdf validation spike (2-3 days)
  - Validate word position extraction capabilities
  - Decision point: Continue with lopdf or pivot to mupdf-sys

- **Target v0.1.0**: Basic text extraction better than PDFKit alone (4-6 weeks)
- **Target v1.0.0**: Production-ready for technical books and papers (9-12 months)

See [ROADMAP.md](docs/ROADMAP.md) for detailed milestones.

## Quick Start

**Note:** VoxPDF is still in early development. The API shown below represents the planned Swift bindings interface (wrapping the Rust core).

### iOS/macOS (Swift)

```swift
import VoxPDF

// Load a PDF
let url = URL(fileURLWithPath: "book.pdf")
let document = try PDFDocument(url: url)

// Extract text optimized for TTS
let content = try await document.extract()

// Get chapters for navigation
for chapter in content.chapters {
    print("\(chapter.title) - Page \(chapter.pageNumber)")
}

// Get text to read aloud
for paragraph in content.paragraphs {
    // Feed to AVSpeechSynthesizer or your TTS engine
    speak(paragraph.text)
}

// Track word positions for highlighting
for word in paragraph.words {
    highlightRect(word.bounds, on: word.pageNumber)
}
```

### Android (Kotlin) - Coming Soon

```kotlin
// Kotlin bindings will provide similar idiomatic API
val document = PDFDocument(file)
val content = document.extract()
```

### Web (JavaScript) - Coming Soon

```javascript
// WASM bindings will provide JavaScript API
const document = await VoxPDF.open("book.pdf");
const content = await document.extract();
```

## Architecture

```
┌─────────────────────────────────────┐
│   Platform Bindings (Swift, etc.)  │  ← Idiomatic APIs
│   - PDFDocument wrapper             │    Memory management
│   - Native error types              │    async/await
├─────────────────────────────────────┤
│         C FFI Boundary              │  ← Stable interface
│   - Opaque pointers                 │    Cross-platform
│   - C structs                       │    Clear ownership
├─────────────────────────────────────┤
│      Rust Core (voxpdf-core)        │  ← All business logic
│   - PDF parsing (lopdf/mupdf)       │    Memory safe
│   - Text extraction                 │    Performance
│   - Layout analysis                 │    Portable
└─────────────────────────────────────┘
```

## Features

### ✅ Phase 0: Foundation (COMPLETE)
- Project structure
- Rust workspace setup
- Documentation (ARCHITECTURE.md, ROADMAP.md)
- Development plan

### 🚧 Next: Slice 0 (Validation Spike)
- Validate lopdf word position extraction
- Decision: Continue with lopdf or pivot to mupdf-sys

### 🎯 v0.1.0 (4-6 weeks) - Better than PDFKit
- Basic text extraction from PDFs
- Word position tracking (for highlighting)
- Paragraph detection
- Hyphenation reassembly
- TOC extraction from PDF metadata
- Swift bindings + Swift Package Manager distribution

### 🎯 v0.5.0 (3-4 months) - Technical Books
- Multi-column layout detection
- Header/footer removal
- Intelligent reading order
- Chapter detection via font analysis

### 🌟 v1.0.0 (9-12 months) - Production Ready
- Complex layouts (3-column, mixed)
- Footnote handling
- Table detection
- Android (Kotlin) bindings
- Comprehensive test suite (100+ PDFs)

See [ROADMAP.md](docs/ROADMAP.md) for complete feature timeline.

## Philosophy

### Incremental Progress
We ship value early and improve over months/years. Each release solves real problems, even if not perfect.

### Tested Against Reality
Every feature is tested against real PDFs: technical books, academic papers, novels, magazines. We accept PDF test cases from the community.

### Focused Scope
VoxPDF optimizes for **reading**, not editing or rendering. We solve the 80% case extremely well rather than trying to handle every PDF edge case.

### Community-Driven
The roadmap evolves based on GitHub issues, user-submitted problematic PDFs, and community pull requests.

## Installation

**Coming Soon** - VoxPDF will be available once v0.1.0 is released.

### Rust (Core Library)

```toml
[dependencies]
voxpdf-core = "0.1"
```

### iOS/macOS (Swift Package Manager)

```swift
dependencies: [
    .package(url: "https://github.com/yourusername/voxpdf-swift.git", from: "0.1.0")
]
```

### Android (Gradle)

```gradle
// Coming in v1.0
implementation 'com.voxpdf:voxpdf-kotlin:0.1.0'
```

### Web (npm)

```bash
# Coming in v1.0+
npm install voxpdf-wasm
```

## Documentation

- [Roadmap](docs/ROADMAP.md) - Phased development plan
- [Architecture](docs/ARCHITECTURE.md) - Technical design decisions
- [Contributing](docs/CONTRIBUTING.md) - How to help build VoxPDF
- [API Reference](docs/API.md) - Detailed API documentation (coming soon)

## Use Cases

VoxPDF is perfect for:

- 📱 **TTS apps** - Audiobook players, accessibility tools, reading assistants
- 📚 **Educational tools** - Study apps, language learning, academic research
- ♿ **Accessibility** - Screen readers, dyslexia aids, visual impairment support
- 🎧 **Personal projects** - DIY audiobook creation, podcast generation

## Contributing

We welcome contributions! See [CONTRIBUTING.md](docs/CONTRIBUTING.md) for:

- How to set up the development environment
- Good first issues for newcomers
- Code style guidelines
- How to submit test PDFs

**Help Wanted:**
- 🐛 Bug reports with problematic PDFs
- ✨ Feature requests based on real use cases
- 📝 Documentation improvements
- 🧪 Test PDFs from different generators (LaTeX, InDesign, Word, etc.)

## Real-World Testing

VoxPDF is battle-tested as the PDF engine for [Listen2](https://github.com/yourusername/Listen2), a TTS audiobook player for iOS. Every improvement to VoxPDF immediately benefits Listen2 users.

## License

MIT License - see [LICENSE](LICENSE) for details.

Free to use in commercial and open-source projects.

## Acknowledgments

Built with:
- **Rust** - Memory-safe systems language enabling cross-platform performance
- **lopdf** - Pure Rust PDF parsing library (starting point)
- **MuPDF** - Industry-standard PDF library (fallback option)
- **Claude Code** - AI pair programming for incremental development
- **Community** - Test PDFs, bug reports, and feature requests from users worldwide

Inspired by:
- **Foxit SDK** - Commercial PDF SDK (C++ core) that proved the compiled core + FFI + bindings architecture
- **PSPDFKit** - Commercial SDK (C++ core) demonstrating cross-platform PDF excellence
- **Voice Dream Reader** - iOS app that showed the importance of precise word highlighting
- **MuPDF** - Open-source PDF library (C core) demonstrating what's achievable
- **Listen2** - Our TTS app that sparked the need for VoxPDF

We follow the same proven pattern as commercial SDKs, but use Rust instead of C++ for memory safety.

## Support

- 🐛 [Report a bug](https://github.com/yourusername/VoxPDF/issues/new?template=bug_report.md)
- 💡 [Request a feature](https://github.com/yourusername/VoxPDF/issues/new?template=feature_request.md)
- 📖 [Submit a problematic PDF](https://github.com/yourusername/VoxPDF/issues/new?template=pdf_test_case.md)
- 💬 [Discussions](https://github.com/yourusername/VoxPDF/discussions)

---

**Status**: 🚧 Phase 0 Complete - Foundation laid, validation spike next
**Architecture**: Rust core + C FFI + platform bindings (Swift, Kotlin, WASM)
**Maintainer**: [@zachswift](https://github.com/zachswift)
**Started**: November 2025
**Next Milestone**: Slice 0 validation spike (2-3 days)
**First Release Target**: February 2026 (v0.1.0)

**Star ⭐ this repo if you believe TTS should be accessible to everyone!**
